Okay, this is May the 6th, 1990, interview by
Michael Enochs. The person being interviewed is
Alan Enochs. And Alan, the first question is, in
the interest of accumulated knowledge, asking
you to donate this tape. the Texas A&M oral history
collection in the University Archives. Is that
all right with you? That's okay. Okay. All right.
Now then, first question. You joined the Army in
1967,
and I have here specifically to become a warrant
officer to fly helicopters and to go to Vietnam.
And what were your reasons for this decision? I
needed to get drafted. As I was out of school or not
doing well in school, I figured my draft number was
about up, and so it was time to make the best deal.
But also, it was a shortcut to go and start flying.
So there were really two reasons. Yeah, flying the
helicopters was really the main reason. Vietnam
was not something you were necessarily
interested in, if possible. Is that correct? Or
were you wanting to go to Vietnam? Not at all. OK.
No, that was one of the unfortunate. It was sort of
inevitable at that point. Exact consequences of
doing it. All right. OK. After arriving in
Vietnam, can you describe your assignments and
activities?
Arriving in Vietnam, I went to 17th Group and was
assigned to 7th and 17th Air Cavalry and became a
scout pilot for them, which was basically going
out, flying out, hovering in the bushes, looking
for any signs of any enemy activity in any
suspected hotspots wherever we were put. And we
usually found them by getting shot at, but that's
what we did. Okay, uh, where were you stationed at
that time? I was stationed in Campanari in, uh,
Pleiku, Vietnam. Pleiku. And shortly thereafter
went to Phanthiet. To, uh, would you repeat that?
Uh, went to Phanthiet, Vietnam. I spent, uh, five
months in Phanthiet, went to, back to Campanari,
and then our troops moved to Bamituid, and then I
went back to Campanari at the end of the tour. Okay.
Uh, Would you describe the racial makeup of your
group?
Mostly white. Enlisted, probably a few more
blacks. Officers, probably 2% to 3% were black.
As far as enlisted, I really can't remember how
many there were. But it might have been 10% to 20%
black. Okay.
Now, of the 2% or 3% officers that were black, were
part of these also pilots? Oh, yeah. The unit I was
with was mainly pilots. There were 67 officers in
the unit, and
probably 66 of them were officers, pilots. Okay,
and of the 66, maybe a couple, as many as two or three
of them were black? Uh-huh. Yeah, I was just trying
to think how many there were, and it was one or two of
them. Okay. I remember one of them real well, but I
can't remember half the truth anyway. Yeah, I
understand. Were there any racial problems
within the group? None at all that I remember.
Okay. No, I don't remember any racial problems.
What were your feelings about the U.S.
involvement in Vietnam when you joined?
Really, no feelings. I was 19 years old when I
joined.
As far as should be there or shouldn't be there, I
guess that's where you're just trusting in the
government.
So, I guess It was okay at that time with me. During
your first tour of duty, did your feelings
regarding our involvement change any?
Did my feelings change any? I'm just trying to
think of how I felt when I came out. and
uh yeah i guess though i still wasn't uh against so
no no i still wasn't against the war at that point
you still felt like that what the country was doing
they were doing for a good reason yeah
uh Was there any discussion within your group
about why we were fighting in Vietnam? Very
little. I really, like I say, it's a long time ago,
but I don't really remember any heated
discussions or anything going on about why we were
there.
Okay.
I've got here if any. of this discussion, or did any
of this discussion change between your first tour
of duty in 1969 and when you were over there the
second time?
Second tour, I don't really remember anything
much, but when I was there, second tour, I was only
in the unit for just over a month, it seems like. I
think like I was in, I know I got out in January of 71,
but I got there November and it was a lot of hard
November when I got assigned to a unit so I was it was
maybe a little more than a month I was actually in
unit I didn't really hardly get to know people well
I don't have this question on the sheet but let me
ask you this between the time you got back from your
first terror duty while you were between tours of
duty, and I guess you were stationed in Germany a
good part of that time. Was there any discussion?
Do you recall any discussion about our
involvement in Vietnam between those people that
were in with you? No, I really don't.
No, I don't remember any discussion at all in
Germany. OK. Could you describe your
relationship with the Vietnamese people, both
the military personnel and the civilians? Okay, I
was very isolated from the Vietnamese people
totally in the unit as
we were, from the time I got in the country, we were
always restricted in going into town, or more or
less always, and so I had very little chance to ever
mix or talk with any of the Vietnamese people. Say
the last three months that I was in country and I was
the civil affairs officer for the squadron that I
was in, which meant that I had two villages, a
mountain yard village named and a Vietnamese
village, Lausanne, that we had a civil affairs
team that would go out to It helped out with little
government projects. We also rent a medical
shelter in Lausanne. And then I also took care of
the indigenous personnel on the base. But any
in-depth discussions, didn't really have any. It
was on a...
Oh, what? Very shallow level. It was... Just
business-type relationships, you might say.
Okay. Did your feelings toward the people of
Vietnam change while you were there? For
instance, your feelings toward the military
personnel? I didn't really feel like... Well, I
guess that was one of the feelings over there, was
the fact that we just didn't feel like they cared
much about... They didn't have their hearts into
the fighting end of it, that might be a good way to
put it. they uh anytime they've gotten any heavy
firefighters or something they were always
calling for u.s assistance and so we would be
rolling in to help them out on something like that
but they never really appeared to be good fighters
or fighting for a cause or anything you might say
and your uh experience there with the civilians
during the last three months, could you describe
possibly how you felt about their feelings
towards Americans or whatever?
Their feelings towards Americans? The
Vietnamese, the people of Lausanne, were Oh, they
were nice enough, but they didn't really give a
hoot about us being there. Where the mountain
yards were more,
were happier to be around the American people.
They were a little more congenial.
As far as working with you and your efforts to
whatever you were doing there, were they Did they
work with you on it, or just exactly as far as that
part went, a working relationship?
The mountain yards were a lot more to kick in and
help and whatever, where the Vietnamese people
were really, I guess, looking for a handout.
You know, come in, do this, do that, do that. That
will help us. It's
fine. Could you describe the general attitudes of
the Americans that you knew in Vietnam toward the
Vietnamese military? The general attitude was
that they didn't fight worth a hoot. They
weren't... You wouldn't trust them to help you on
some job as far as fire fighting or whatever. Yeah,
that's sort of the general feeling, sort of what I
said before. They just did not care to contribute
that much or weren't able to, whatever. Okay. How
about towards the civilians? The general
attitude of the people you were with or the
Americans? general attitude, I guess we weren't
that well accepted in Vietnam.
Okay.
While in Vietnam, were you aware of the peace
movement in the United States? Yes.
While there, could you describe your feelings
towards that movement? Well, it wasn't very good.
I guess or while there, yeah,
it just didn't feel like you had any support from
the U.S. at all.
Was there discussion within the group as far as
about the issues that were brought up by the
movement? I really can't recall any feelings or
any discussions.
Lost
my place. While performing your duties, were
there any restrictions or limitations in place
because of politics? And did the nature of these
restrictions or limitations change, for
instance, between your first tour of duty and your
second tour of duty? There were a lot of
limitations on like rules of engagement. They
were fairly strict, even on the first tour, where
any time we went into an area, we were given room to
engage in the first tour. We were actually given
free fire zones sometimes. But if it wasn't a free
fire zone, even if we were being shot at before we
could return fire, we would have to request
permission to return fire and have somebody
approve it. Second tour, it was very, very strict
that you could get in a bind really if you didn't
know the person who approved the shoot. So, and
generally politics played in it. I would surmise
as some of the areas that, like second tour, one of
the areas I was in I was flying with the 23rd
Infantry Division, which was originally the
Americal Division, as William Kelly's name. And
we were up close to the village of Milai. Had a bird
shot down. I was on station in a Cobra at that time
with one gun, fully loaded, and requested
permission to fire. And we couldn't shoot back,
even though we were being shot at that time with a
bird on the ground. had to get him out the best we
could so and they kept saying no civilians on the
ground and it was the area that we were in pure
reason
that we couldn't shoot back yeah so it was just just
strictly because you were close to an area that had
already gotten a lot of attention exactly yeah but
uh generally there was a lot of areas that you could
shoot in that were areas of suspected heavy enemy
concentration that you weren't allowed to shoot
in just because you weren't allowed to shoot
there. Right. That didn't work. Okay. And your
incident there near Malai, Malai, you're talking
about having a bird on the ground, and I'm assuming
there were men on the ground that you were trying
to... Oh, yeah, yeah. We had a bird shot down, so we
had... It was a Huey. We had... Probably eight to
ten of our own on the ground. Seems like we used to
carry about four to six birds, so yeah, six to eight
people on the ground. Okay, and wound up other
helicopters going in under fire? Yeah. But not
able to fire while they were going in? Well,
supposedly not able to. Okay. Officially not able
to. Officially not able to. Okay.
Could you describe your feelings about how the
military was conducting the war in Vietnam?
I don't know. As far as the tactics that were being
used, I don't know. At the time, I sure was in a
position to understand the overall strategies
and
No, I really don't know how I felt about it. Well,
when you were, for instance, in these positions
where you knew that you were in contact or you had
contact with the enemy, but you're not being
allowed to either return fire or to pursue the
enemy, did that lead to discussion between your
men as to why or what the purpose was? Yeah,
everybody was generally very upset about the
whole situation.
Was not pleased at all.
But what do you, I don't know what to say about it.
Okay, well now, in the second part of that same
question, was your feelings towards the way the
U.S. government was conducting the war.
Were
they doing it right? Were they doing it wrong?
I really don't know. I don't know if they were
handling it right or not. It was a guerrilla war.
It's a new type of war. No lines, nothing. How do you
know if you're winning or losing or whatever? I
never really had much feeling on it. Things were
getting ahead if there was something to do
different and right. Sort of felt like we weren't
doing that much.
Okay, well, now then, when you returned to the
United States, could you describe your welcome,
if any? Welcome is a bad word to use for it. Yeah, you
came back and you just didn't want to wear the
uniform. You didn't want to be recognized as part
of the military because you were not treated well.
I don't know. More or less abused if you had the
uniform on would be a good way to put it. When you
came back your first time, where did you come in?
Came into, well, when I came back first time, I came
into Washington. planted in Tacoma. Okay. Uh,
and, uh, did you, did you experience this feeling
or this attitude about not wanting to wear the
uniform right off or was it something? Yeah,
generally, uh, anybody around, I'd say anybody,
most people or a lot of people you ran into were, um,
Oh, gosh, what the word. Well, you didn't get a good
welcome. Hey, great job or anything. You never
heard anything like that. What are you all doing
over there anyway?
War mongers. I don't know. Gentle attitude was not
good. Since you're from the middle of the country,
this... Did this seem to change any as you, for
instance, got home in Oklahoma as opposed to on the
coast? Yes. You didn't have near the animosity
that you felt on the coast that you did at home. But
it wouldn't necessarily still describe it as a
welcome other than with your family. Yeah, that's
true. Family and friends, of course, welcome you
home. Right. Some people were curious and would
ask, but you didn't really. There is no other
welcome besides that. This great job thing you
mentioned just didn't turn up very often. No, not
at all. Okay.
After you returned to the States, did you feel you
had to explain your reasons for going to Vietnam or
your actions while you were there? Sort of just
avoided the subject. I tried not to explain too
much because you sort of ended up on the losing end
of any battle that you got into. If nothing else, by
sheer numbers of people that were talking to you,
unless you were one-on-one, but I don't know.
Yeah, you maybe felt a little guilty or whatever
about going. Okay.
Did you feel the... that the citizens' attitudes
about the war were informed, or were they, for
instance, tired of the whole thing, or avoiding
the whole issue because of some hidden guilt of
their own?
The media informed everybody every day. I think
people were tired of the war, and they wanted to see
it over. It was enough for nothing else to quit
seeing it on the news every night. They definitely
got an upfront view. from what I saw on the news.
Yeah, it was. We had the running statistic of the
daily body count and all of this. And I don't know
what all it seemed, as I recall, every night. So
maybe that, like I say, the people, they were just
too busy with their own lives to even listen maybe.
about the questions of the whys of the Vietnam War?
Yeah, I don't know how informed the people were.
Like I said, I talked to very few people, really,
about Vietnam. I sort of tried to avoid the issue,
as a matter of fact. Okay. All right, now then, the
last question that we have is the biggie. And this
is, do you recall the songs that were played in
Vietnam? And... Were they important to you
because of what they reminded you of, or were they
important because of the way they reflected, or
because they reflected the way you felt at the
time? The song I remember the biggest is Country
Joe and the Fish, singing, oh, send your boy off to
Vietnam. I can't remember the name of the song. But
I get, I don't know, we had a lot of, thongs that you
heard, it was just sort of a release mechanism to,
uh, because you were scared to use. So I, I don't
know. I remember you're going home in the body bag
and I remember the country Joe and the fish song.
Um, guys, I remember the thongs that were over
there. I remember the hair, uh, The play here was
out and we had the soundtrack to that. You heard
that a lot. But as far as identifying with all the
feelings of the songs and so forth, I can't really
remember any songs that we clung onto at all.
As far as, well, I guess there was a lot of songs
against the war at that time, against war period,
that
I don't really remember any that I can find on to.
Okay, well, that is all the questions that I had at
this time. And is there anything else you can think
of that you might want to add? No. All right, well,
Alan, I appreciate it. Okay. And...